This is a test. This is Terry Anderson. Today's
date is April 8, 1980. This is the second interview
with Dr. Patton Burns of the Vet School on the Vet
Medicine Project. This is a test.
This is the second interview But Dr. Burns, last
time we ended our first interview talking about
Dr. Mark Francis, and this time I'd like to
continue talking about personalities that you
were involved with over the years. Do you have
anything else to say about Mark Francis, or should
we move on to others? I don't recall. Well, you were
saying about the greatest man that you knew. Yes.
Of course he did
his world of experience in extension work,
experimentation work primarily, and teaching.
And he was it, of course, up until sixteen.
But there's no end of stories about him. He was
quite an interesting person. What about Ross
Perry Marsteller? Well, yes. Dr. Marsteller
came, I said, not until 16. I made a mistake there.
Dr. Marsteller graduated from Ohio State
University and came to Texas in 1905, I believe,
to help Dr. Francis.
In fact, from the time I knew it, from my experience
from 23 on, Dr. Marsteller took care of more of the
academics. And Dr.
Francis, of course, taught anatomy and had the
title of dean. But Dr. Marsteller did more of the
work More the administration? Yes, oh yes.
Why was that? Was he a better administrator do you
think? No, probably because of Dr. Francis'
difficulty in hearing. Oh, I see. And Dr. Marston
enjoyed meeting people and he knew I think
practically every mother and father of every
student he ever had. It was more of a family
proposition. What kind of person was Marsteller?
Well, he was a very good teacher and I think a good
administrator. Some
of the students didn't like him. I think the
majority of us did. Why didn't they like him? I
think because he was quite harsh with them for a
purpose.
I think if they would have acceded to his advice,
they would have been better off. In what way was he
harsh? Well, he'd get on some pretty hard about
that dress. wearing
overalls and coveralls and things like that that
he thought they should dress properly. Did he have
a dress code? We didn't have any uniform code. We
didn't have any dress code. Oh, you didn't. But he
wanted them to look neatly and it was for their own
good.
I think he was, he has a, pardon me, As a hobby, of
course, he was quite interested in horses. And he
was an early riser, and he spent many, many hours at
the veterinary hospital. I know he took his lunch.
And Dr. Walton, who was president from 25 on, said
that, told him he must be a poor administrator if he
couldn't get time to go home and get a meal. why he
must not have his work organized properly. But
that was it. How do you think Marsteller got along
with Dr. Francis? Fine, fine. Oh, I don't think
anyone ever failed to get along with Dr. Francis.
He was just that type of individual. Yes, that is
right. Dr. Marsteller was harder to get along
with, but I worked under him. In what way? Well, his
personality. I might call him moody at times, but I
could see it sometimes. I could tell when he walked
in the front door in the morning. And I guess
probably I was the first one he saw, and he was the
first one I saw because it was so early. And I lived
in the hospital, but I could tell and watch him
during the day, and I'd know when to and not to cross
him with anything, and so.
How'd you get along with him? Fine, I got along with
him fine. But I never had any trouble with any
administrators. We had, fortunately, enough to
have some very good administrators. I know when
Dr. Francis died, there was some rumbling among
some of the former students that they wanted
somebody else from outside for dean. And I told
them, I said, you're spinning your wheels. I said,
the dean has already been selected. Well, I had
talked to Dr. Walton about it. And so
I could tell that he was going to make his choice.
And he was leaning to Dr. Marsteller.
highly recommended Dr. Marsteller. Of course, he
didn't ask me for my recommendation, but he just
asked for my opinion, getting a student's
viewpoint. And, oh well, I was on the staff then,
too, when that happened. And talked to a number,
and he was made acting dean in fall of 36, and in 37,
he was made dean. He was on a trial basis, I guess.
did the same thing he'd been doing for years.
They were thinking, though, about going to the
outside, maybe back to Ohio State or something?
Some of the former students, several of whom
didn't care too much about Dr. Marsteller, but it
was a personality clash. They'd had trouble with
him somewhere along the way. And it was, I guess
they figured there was a time to howl.
I told some of them, I said, you may as well quiet
down. I said, I think he's already been selected. I
said, I'm not saying that he has been, but I feel
pretty sure that Dr. Marshall is going to be our
dean. And I said, at the time that I thought he'd
make a good one, and I thought he did. Of course,
then he got in bad health. Well, speaking of the
former students, these were individuals,
though. This wasn't the former student
association, was it? No, no, no, no association.
Has the former students, now that we're on this,
has the former students association ever had any
input into the administration of the vet school
that you can remember? Not that I recall, not at
all. Okay, now let's talk about Ralph Dunn. Well,
he was...
Because of Dr. Marsteller's health, he resigned
as dean, and he had gone to Mayo's in Rochester. Oh,
he did. He went to the Mayo Clinic. Yes, Mayo Clinic
for surgery. What health problem did he have?
Well, thyroid, and he had, I think, let it go a
little too long, and I think that's one thing that
perhaps influenced his or affected his
personality, but not to a severe degree as far as I
was concerned. But when you got up there, you
got time to think about it more, and he stayed some
time. I don't recall how long, but he never was in
too good health from then on.
So he relinquished the duties and
Dean Bowden came in in 48, Dr. Dunn was in Dean in 47,
48 I think, yes. For about one year. Yeah, one year.
And then they brought in Dr. Bowden who was in
research at Sonora Experiment Station. Dr.
Boughton graduated in Ohio State in 1916, and then
spent one year coaching football. He had been
captain of the football team up there, and he was
coaching the line in 1916, 17,
and then he decided to go on with graduate work, and
he went to the University of Illinois. and in
research work. And from there he went to Haiti and
for I believe in 1925 and he
was there and there until 31. In 31, 32 he took
graduate work back at Ohio State. He was just
biding his time until some offer came along. Then
the opportunity of that experiment station job at
Sonora opened up. He started there in 1932 and
remained there until 1948.
I feel pretty sure that Dr. Dunn was dean under one
year, maybe a year and a half, something like that.
What kind of man was Dr. Dunn? Rather reserved,
quiet. He'd spent his time, he came here in 1911,
I believe. He was a graduate of Ohio State.
He was in, took care of the
hard collar serum laboratory. At that time they
made whole blood hard collar.
The private institutions took that over and made a
serum rather than whole blood.
The college discontinued the use of the hog collar
work. And then Dr. Dunn switched to poultry. And he
was a very good man in poultry science. And they
made old chicken pox vaccine. I know one summer
when I, in summer of 25,
he was gone for a month or two. And they turned the
job of making that chicken pox vaccine over to me
and filling orders and things like that. And so I
got to know Dr. Dunn's work pretty well that way. He
was a good man.
What kind of teacher was he? Very good. Good
lecturer. But
I don't know, unless he wasn't entirely sold. The
administration wanted to put in, wanted to,
at that time, the administration
wanted to combine extension work, agricultural
extension work, agricultural experimentation,
and the teaching all in one. And Dr. Boughton
implemented that, and he did that work and did a
good job of it. I don't know unless some of them
doubted that Dr. Dunn was sold on the idea of
combining them. Some people were against it, some
few. And it all turned out for the good. But
I don't know what happened, but they...
brought Dr. Boughton in. Yeah, doesn't it seem
rather odd that Dr. Dunn would be here almost three
decades and then they'd appoint him dean. He'd
only last one year and then I think he went to
Florida.
No, he— He left in 1948, didn't he, after one year of
being the dean? He married the former secretary in
the School of Under-Medicine, Minnie Dunn, and
she had inherited a farm down here around
Wellborn, American, and he just resigned and
started working down there at home. He just became
a private citizen around here. I don't ever recall
him going to Florida. Oh, then I mixed up. But
nevertheless, he still, after just having that
job for one year, all of a sudden resigns. And he
wasn't that old. He wasn't in his 60s. I understand
he was rather bitter about it, but I don't know any
particulars. I know only the good parts about him.
Did he set up his own clinic? No. So he just had his
own ranch. He just dropped all of his activities in
veterinary medicine.
How about Dr. Schmidt? Dr. Schmidt
I think was influenced in taking veterinary
medicine here. At the University of Berlin, Dr.
Francis had him in class, as all agricultural
students did. Dr. Schmidt finished here, I think,
in 1908 or 7,
8, I believe. Yes, because then Dr. Francis was
responsible for him having gone to University of
Berlin. because he was brought up around Comfort,
in Comfort, west of San Antonio, and German
descent. In fact, he had quite a brogue. I don't
know whether he ever talked any English at home.
But he went to Berlin, and took four years of
veterinary medicine, finished in 12, and came
back here and married a native of Berlin. And she's
still living here in Bryan. Oh, really? What's her
name?
Gertrude Schmidt, S-C-H-M-I-D-T. She's a
patient in Bryan Hospital. She had a stroke,
severe stroke, about a year or two ago. and
she's in a coma. Oh, she is? Semicomatose, yes.
They say that she can recognize you with her eyes,
but the paralysis says she looks
much younger and no wrinkles. She has a beautiful
complexion. And they say she still has it. And
he brought her back from Berlin? I don't know
whether they married over there or I think she came
over here and then they married over in the States.
But he was implied to help Dr. Francis with a tick
problem. and with the inoculation of calves in the
wintertime for Texas tick fever.
He was, Dr. Francis officially was Director of the
Vendor Division of the Aero-Cushion Experiment
Station. entitled, but Dr. Schmidt did the work.
And then following Dr. Francis' death in 36, Dr.
Schmidt was continued as he became administrator
of the veterinary division. Did you ever have him
for classes? No, he didn't do any teaching. See,
they were separate by that time. Did you ever work
with him? Oh, his office was right, my office was
right above Dr. Francis. I was on the second floor.
Dr. Schmidt was on the third floor. His office was
right above me. So we saw each other every day when
he was in town. He did a lot of, well, it's extension
work himself, mostly experimentation, but some
of that work was in West Texas. He might be gone for a
week or two. Say poisonous plants problem would be
in the, Edwards Plateau region or in the Big Bend or
around Pecos. So he'd be gone for sometimes a week
or two more at a time.
But he was in an automobile accident on this Curtin
Road and some man turned into the road and he never
recovered. That was, he lived to be 71 or 71 and a
half. Dr. Mesthal, I think, was 71. Dr. Francis,
73.
What kind of man was Dr. Schmidt? He was a great big,
he had been a football player here. Really?
I don't think he'd ever seen a football or touched a
football until he got to A&M. And he, I guess it was a
guard or tackle, I don't recall, but he was a big man
and strong, very strong. But he got a little
arthritis in his last few years, but it slowed him
down a little bit, but he was still a strong man. He
owned a place out on Curtin Road, and oh, I think
they're finding that oil area and she sold it after
that and he he had gone into uh he cooperated a great
deal with the king ranch and uh but down there quite
a bit of the time and uh he went in the santa
gertrudis business and uh had some excellent
santa gertrudis cattle and when he died and uh So
somebody realized the value of those cattle. Mrs.
Smith was going to sell them market price. And
somebody realized that they were worth more than
that. So
someone had Dr. Jimmy Northway to come up from the
King Ranch, the veterinarian down there, to
evaluate them. And it saved her a lot of money. But
she sold them at a good price.
but unfortunately sold the land a little bit too
soon.
Because of the oil. Well, the prices of land in
general over the county, too. How about Dr. Van
Valkenburgh? Dr. Van Valkenburgh was brought in
here from, in 1936,
I believe in 1937 the Department of Parasitology
was organized. At the same time that the
Veterinary Hygiene was organized. And I know
Jackie came up from Beaumont. He had the job, took
the job that I had at Beaumont when I came back up
here. And Dr. Kerr asked me, I was with Dr. Kerr, and
he asked me if anyone I could recommend. Heard that
Dr. Jagger wasn't too happy with his job in New
Orleans. He was with three men, and they were all
track veterinarians. And on the track season down
there, Dr. Jagger had all the work to do, and it was
mostly small animals, a lot of it small animals.
And Karsten Dyke, Chapman, I've forgotten the
other man's name, But I
said Dr. Jange might be interested, and so he
contacted him and he came. He stayed there from—I
came up here in 26, he stayed down there until 37.
Then he came up and took over veterinary hygiene.
And at the same time, Dr. Marsteller was dean, and
he thought we needed a department of
neuroparasitology. So Dr. Turk took that over.
Now wait a minute, I may be wrong about this. Dr.
Turk took it over after Dr. Van Valkenburgh died.
So Dr. Van Valkenburgh took it over in 37. until his
death, and I don't recall that date. I believe
about 46, something like that. I'm not positive.
By Dr. Van Valkenburgh,
I had been down on research work in parasitology in
the Indies, I believe, and I'd forgotten his work
that he was doing when he came here. but he was an
excellent fine gentleman and a good teacher and he
helped a lot. Do you remember Dr. Wharton? Arthur
E. Wharton? Indeed I do. We came here together.
He's a product of Colorado and he took the job in 26
in in pathology when I took the job in physiology
and pharmacology. Pathology then included
parasitology and I guess you might say hygiene and
let's see, I guess that takes it all, but he had the
whole thing to do.
He was an associate professor in charge, and I
recall
in, let's see, in 36 when Dr. Francis died,
I think it took a year, and then Dr. Marstall and Dr.
Wharton couldn't get along too well. So Wharton
went to San Antonio, some crooked laboratories, I
think. But I'd have a letter from him or a wire once
in a while, telephone conversation with him once
in a while, inquiring about this or that. And I saw
him a couple of times before his death. I don't
recall
what date. I think Dr. Miller told me he was a rather
unusual man. Yes, he had married ten times. Ten
times?
That means only nine. I remember wife number two
and ten were the same person.
And she was the one who shot him. Oh, that's right,
yeah. Yes, it was unusual. I
remember the occasion when we went with the whole
student body
down, which constituted only about 10 or 15, down
to Sulphur Springs,
downhill on the Navasota River, the bottoms. And
so
we sat around the campfire, drank some strong
coffee, and both of us were wide awake. And some of
the, two or three of the boys went with us, and I
guess the boys wanted to go. They wanted to go frog
gigging and
tramp through the woods. And we left, I guess, must
have been about twelve o'clock, something like
that. So it was about five o'clock before we got
back. And we got within about a hundred yards, and
it was very dark. And we'd call, and of course those
boys in the camp wouldn't answer us. And we were
lost. And so finally we heard the fire had gone
down, and so we heard some of them laughing.
But
he was a woodsman. He had many guns, and he was a gun
collector. But a very strong man, very agile. But
he had some very good qualities.
But we never crossed each other. I don't recall a
single word of disagreement that we ever had.
But he did some things that I wouldn't have proved
out, but I... I don't ever recall having a
conversation with Dr. Marstead or any of the
higher authorities about him. I think, I don't
know who reported it, whether it was students of
some of his activities, but
he left in 37. Let's
turn to your career now. in 1935 you were appointed
head of the Department of Veterinary Physiology
and Pharmacology, a position that you held for
over three decades. Why did they appoint you? I
can't answer that.
I recall once in about 1933 or something I had, at
two different times I had two different jobs
offered to me.